# The Relationship of Containers and Software Testing
Position paper for SATURN 2016 Workshop on Containers  
Dennis Mancl, MSWX Software Experts  
dmancl@acm.org  

Abstract:  The software testing world may need to have some input into the possible architectural uses of container technology.

Containers are a new kind of dynamic architectural element in the world of distributed systems -- bigger than a module, smaller than a system.  There will be a lot of different variations of architectural styles that use containers for many things:  managing individual services, module interfaces, managing threads and processes, access and control of cloud-based processing and data resources, and providing transparent access to shared resources.  Each of these "use cases" for containers may introduce a number of issues that might need to be addressed by certain "good practices" in software design and software testing.  Of course, we may need many possible sets of architecture and design rules.

For example, there is already a debate raging in the container community about the desireability of "stateless containers" as a standard design practice, but the wisdom of this constraint will probably depend on the architectural context.  Stateless containers make a lot of sense if they are used in the design of simple APIs and simple services.  But there are probably many situations in data management and compute-service management where it might be good to have a weaker set of constraints on the internal behavior of the software within a container.

There may be some lessons to apply from the world of software testing.  Simple testing tools and techniques are common for the testing of small modules and interfaces.  But for many modules and subsystems that have more complex aggregate behavior, it is often easier to drive some of the key test scenarios through a more intricate set of helper code -- mock objects, dependency injection, and internal test modules generated from state models.  The average container may be designed with a very simple interaction model with its environment, but there will certainly be some parts of a complex system where "stateful" containers might act as configurable controllers or accumulators.

Container-based functionality needs to be testable... The code deployed in containers need to be well tested, because the flexibility in deploying containers will call for their use for some of the fastest-changing functionality in our software systems.  The test planning process must be at the heart of the container design lifecycle.  Test scenarios must cover the possible combinations of container behavior that might be deployed in the field.  If dynamic reconfiguration is an essential part of the container-based architecture, then test scenarios must exercise the scenarios where two versions of a container might be used in different parts of the same system.  In addition, tests for performance, reliability, and security consequences should not be ignored.

What do I hope to learn from this workshop?  Containers may be used in some critical infrstructure, such as telecom networks, and we need to understand how to use containers to support reliable and testable behavior in these systems.  There will probably be multiple sets of usage conventions that are needed to support different sizes and scales of development -- isolated services, closely cooperating processes, modules that can be easily composed to build new functionality, and small time-critical services.
